Implementation Plan for the Self-Building Task Agent

Current Implementation (Phase 1 Foundation)

The Task Agent already has a solid foundation in place. Key capabilities implemented so far include:

Backend & UI: A Flask-based backend (previously on Render, migrating to Vercel) processes commands via an API, and a front-end control panel (on Vercel) allows a non-coder user to send instructions through a friendly interface. The backend is running and responds to basic requests (e.g. the index route returns a status message).

Basic Task Execution: The agent can handle simple intents like creating files. For example, an intent create_file triggers writing a new file to the workspace. The core execution logic (task_executor.execute_task in task_executor.py) currently supports file creation and can be extended for more actions. Each task execution returns a result indicating success, failure, or if the action is not handled yet.

Task Queueing: The system supports queuing multiple tasks to run sequentially. The agent’s memory (context.json) has a next_steps list where tasks can be queued. A user (or the agent itself) can add tasks to this queue via a queue_task intent. The /run_next endpoint or corresponding function pops the next queued step and executes it. This allows stacking tasks and running them one after another without further user intervention for each step.

Task Planning & Confirmation: Before executing a command, the agent often formulates an execution plan (either provided by ChatGPT or derived from the intent). Potentially risky operations (like deployments or file deletions) are designed to require user confirmation. Currently, the agent logs a plan and sets a flag for confirmation rather than executing immediately if an action is deemed risky or if the system’s trust in that action is low. The user must explicitly confirm via the /confirm endpoint for the agent to proceed. This human-in-the-loop safety check is in place to prevent unwanted changes.

Memory & Logging: The agent maintains a persistent JSON memory state (context.json) that tracks important info: counts of confirmed/rejected actions, a history of recent tasks and results, any noted failure patterns, and records of self-edits or deployments. After each task, this memory is saved to disk and also important events are logged. Logs (saved as timestamped JSON files in a logs/ directory) include details of the input, the planned execution, and the outcome. There is integration with Google Drive: after each task, the latest log is uploaded to a Drive folder (organized by date) via the drive_uploader.py module. This ensures an external backup of the agent’s activity and state, so it can be resumed or audited even if the agent restarts.

Version Control Hooks: The agent has preliminary support for Git version control. When it makes changes to its own code or creates new files, it can commit those changes. The structure is in place to push to GitHub (e.g., storing Git credentials and using Git commands or an API). In the current state this may be simulated if not fully configured, but the intention is that each self-edit or file creation could be followed by a commit to preserve history. The context.json tracks a list of self_edits with backups (the agent creates a .bak file before modifying any of its code). This provides rudimentary rollback capability if something goes wrong, and lays the groundwork for more robust self-edit tracking and version control in later phases.

Deployment (Prototype): There is an existing mechanism to deploy projects to Vercel. The deployment_manager.py includes a deploy_to_vercel(api_token, project_name) function that zips the current project directory and uses Vercel’s API to upload files and create a deployment. This suggests the agent can (in theory) deploy its own code or a generated app to a cloud platform. Currently, this is used cautiously or in a “simulated” manner (since automatic deploys are risky without user oversight). It prints the deployed URL on success and logs the event. There’s also tracking for deployments in memory (deployment_events list) to record each deploy attempt and outcome.


Overall, Phase 1 established that the agent can execute file operations, queue tasks, require confirmations for safety, persist its state, backup its code changes, and interface with external services (GitHub, Google Drive, Vercel). This provides a baseline to build upon for more advanced autonomous behaviors.

Issues and Pain Points in the Current System

While the foundation is strong, a review of the code and current behavior reveals several broken features and inefficiencies that need to be addressed:

Queued Task Execution Bug: The /run_next functionality for executing queued tasks has a bug where it does not properly load or handle the next task from the updated context. In practice, users have observed that adding tasks to the queue (via the queue_task intent) and then calling /run_next sometimes yields an error “No queued tasks” or simply doesn’t execute the task.

Cause: The issue is that the code handling /run_next isn’t correctly reading the latest context.json or not properly extracting the task. In app.py, run_next loads the memory and pops the first item from memory["next_steps"]. However, the popped item is a wrapper object (with a step field and timestamp) and it passes this entire object to run_agent instead of the actual step content. Because of this, the executor doesn’t see a valid intent to run. Essentially, the agent fails to detect the queued task’s details.

Consequence: Queued tasks don’t run as expected, breaking the sequential execution flow that should allow multi-step automation. This undermines the ability to stack tasks for autonomous runs.


Confirmation Workflow Glitch: The confirmation handler logic has inconsistencies that could lead to trust metrics not updating or tasks not executing after approval:

In app.py /confirm route, after a user approves a task, the code calls finalize_task_execution(log_data) incorrectly. The finalize_task_execution function is supposed to update the agent’s memory counts (e.g., increment confirmed actions), but it expects a status like "confirmed" or "rejected" as input. Passing the entire log_data dict is a mistake – this means the confirmed count isn’t actually incremented. Similarly, a rejection would not increment the rejected count properly.

Additionally, the context manager lacks explicit functions track_confirmed and track_rejected (they were intended but not implemented, causing a NameError if called). As a result, confirming or rejecting tasks doesn’t update the confirmed_count/rejected_count in memory, and any trust scoring mechanism tied to these counts is non-functional.

Consequence: The agent isn’t actually “learning” from confirmed actions; trust metrics remain static. Also, the log file gets updated with execution results, but the in-memory state might not reflect that the task was confirmed and executed, which could confuse the agent’s understanding of its own success rate.


Google Drive Log Listing Bug: The /logs_from_drive endpoint in app.py attempts to list recent logs from Google Drive by calling list_recent_logs(), but the function is actually named list_recent_drive_logs in drive_uploader.py. This mismatch means the endpoint will throw an error (function not found). It’s a minor naming bug, but it prevents the UI from retrieving recent logs from Drive for the user to inspect.

Incomplete Intent Handling: The task executor currently only truly handles the create_file action (and treats any other action as “skipped”). There’s no implementation yet for intents like modifying files, deleting files, running code, etc., even though those might be needed as the agent grows. This limits the agent’s usefulness and forces everything to be funneled through file creation or external handling. For example, self-editing is implemented via a separate modify_self function in agent_runner, not through a generic intent. There’s an opportunity to unify this into the intent/action framework for consistency.

Duplication and Inconsistencies in Code: Some logic is duplicated or not centrally managed, making the system harder to maintain. For example, there are two ways of running the next task: the app.py /run_next route has its own implementation (popping from the queue and then calling run_agent), while agent_runner.py defines a run_next() function that tries to use a (non-existent) get_next_step from context. This duplication can lead to one path being updated and not the other. Similarly, confirmation execution is handled in both confirm_handler.py and in the /confirm route logic, with slight differences. Unifying these would reduce confusion and bugs.

GitHub Integration Not Fully Utilized: While the agent can commit to GitHub, this isn’t currently automatic. After self-modifications or creating new files, it doesn’t actually call any git commands in the code we have. This means changes are not being pushed to the repo unless done manually. Also, without an automatic commit after each change, the rollback mechanism (using Git history) isn’t as strong as it could be. We have backups for individual files (.bak files), but not a project-wide version history integration yet.

Deployment is All-or-Nothing: The current deploy function always zips and deploys the entire agent’s directory. This is fine for deploying the agent itself, but once the agent starts creating new app projects, we’ll want to deploy those projects specifically. Right now, there’s no support for selecting a subdirectory or a specific project to deploy – an improvement is needed so the agent doesn’t deploy its own code when it intends to deploy a generated app. Also, the deployment function doesn’t currently check for cost or free tier usage; it will just attempt the deploy. In a scenario where credentials or free limits are an issue, the agent might repeatedly try and fail (or succeed without warning of costs).

Minor State Tracking Gaps: The context.json has a last_updated field that isn’t being consistently set on each modification (in the code path used by run_agent, it often remains null). Additionally, intent_stats (tracking success/failure counts per intent) are updated in one code path (update_memory_context) but not in the current execution flow. These inconsistencies mean some of the memory fields are not accurate, which will matter when we introduce a trust scoring system based on past successes/failures.


Addressing these issues is the first priority, to ensure the agent’s current features work reliably before layering on more complexity. Fixing the queue and confirmation flow, in particular, will restore the ability to do multi-step sequences and to accurately track successful operations – both of which are crucial for autonomy.

Roadmap Goals Moving Forward

With the foundational issues noted, we can align our next developments with the long-term roadmap outlined in the "Self-Building Task Agent System" document. The broad objectives for upcoming phases are:

Phase 2 – App Generation & Basic Deployment: Enable the agent to take a high-level user request (e.g. “Build a hello world API”) and scaffold a simple application from scratch, then deploy it automatically with minimal user input. This involves translating natural language into project code (initially focusing on a simple backend like a Flask API), creating the necessary files, and using a hosting provider (likely Vercel by default) to get it running live. The agent should favor free-tier services and should inform the user of any deployment actions (and potential costs) before executing them.

Phase 3 – UI/Frontend Generation (future): After backend app generation, the next step will be allowing the agent to also generate simple front-end components or UI files (like an index.html or basic React app) on command. This phase will expand the agent’s abilities to full-stack generation, but will build on the mechanisms created in Phase 2. (We will keep this in mind but focus first on Phase 2 and Phase 4 features in our immediate plan.)

Phase 4 – Autonomy & Safety Mechanisms: Introduce a trust score system and more sophisticated safety checks so the agent can operate with greater independence when appropriate. The agent will start to auto-confirm routine tasks once it has proven reliable (e.g., after many successful file edits, it won’t ask every time). Conversely, it will still pause for confirmation on novel or risky actions if its trust/confidence in that area is low. This phase also includes robust rollback capabilities: treating every change like a commit so it can be reverted if needed. The agent will leverage version control to undo bad changes, and maintain transparency by logging all decisions. In short, the agent learns when to act autonomously versus when to seek user approval, based on experience.

Phase 5 – Multi-Step Planning & Execution: Give the agent the ability to plan complex tasks by itself. When given a high-level goal, the agent should break it down into a sequence of sub-tasks (an execution plan) and then execute them in order to achieve the goal, adjusting on the fly if something fails. The user should be able to issue one instruction and the agent carries out a multi-step project (e.g., “Create a small web app with X feature and deploy it” could result in the agent planning steps to code the backend, code the frontend, run tests, deploy, etc.). State should persist so if the process is interrupted, the agent can resume where it left off. The end result is an agent that can handle longer workflows semi-autonomously, only involving the user for high-level approval or if it gets stuck.

Phase 6 – Efficiency & Cost Awareness: As the agent becomes truly autonomous, it must also be resource-aware and cost-conscious. This means always choosing the most efficient option (e.g., free tier services by default) and alerting the user if an action might incur costs beyond the free tier or require credentials. For example, if deploying an app or using an API could run out of free quota or needs a paid plan, the agent should warn the user or request confirmation with that context. Additionally, the agent will optimize its deployment choices – perhaps deciding between Vercel, Render, or others based on the app’s needs and the available free offerings – to minimize expense and maximize reliability.


Keeping these goals in mind, we will now outline a step-by-step action plan. This plan prioritizes the next immediate improvements (Phase 2 and the critical parts of Phase 4 and 5) to get the agent to a state where it can build and deploy simple apps with little user input, safely self-modify when trusted, and run multi-step plans. Throughout, we will bundle related changes to minimize the number of manual interventions, and we’ll incorporate best practices (like sandboxed code execution and thorough logging) to ensure safety.

Step-by-Step Action Plan

Below is a detailed plan to evolve the agent, addressing current bugs and incrementally adding new capabilities. Each step is described in plain language and notes which files or modules will be updated. This plan is written so it can be followed in a new ChatGPT conversation to implement the changes.

1. Fix Core Bugs and Streamline Task Execution

Before adding new features, we need to repair the known broken features in the task queue and confirmation system. This will solidify the base for more advanced functionality.

Repair /run_next Queue Processing: Update the logic so that the agent correctly recognizes and executes queued tasks from context.json. In app.py (the /run_next route), instead of passing the entire queued item (which contains a wrapper dict with step and timestamp), extract the actual step payload. For example:

next_item = queue.pop(0)
task = next_item.get("step", next_item)
result = run_agent(task)

Then save the trimmed queue back to memory. This ensures run_agent receives a proper task dict (with an intent and details) and will execute it. Also, implement a helper get_next_step in context_manager.py that pops and returns the next step from context["next_steps"], updating the file. This way, both the route and any internal usage can use the same logic (preventing duplication).
Files to update: app.py (run_next route logic), context_manager.py (new get_next_step function), and possibly remove or adjust the unused agent_runner.run_next function to use this helper for consistency.

Fix Confirmation Logic and Trust Counters: Ensure that when a user confirms or rejects a task, the agent’s memory is updated and the task executes (if approved).

In app.py, within the /confirm route, change the call to finalize_task_execution. We will pass an explicit status string and relevant task info. For example, use finalize_task_execution("confirmed") if approve=True, and finalize_task_execution("rejected", task_info) if approve=False. The task_info can be a brief description or ID of the task from the log for tracking failure patterns.

Implement track_confirmed and track_rejected in context_manager.py. These should increment the confirmed_count or rejected_count in memory and possibly update any running trust score. (We can simply increment the counters and save memory for now.) The finalize_task_execution function (in agent_runner.py) will call these to record the outcome.

Also, when a task is confirmed and executed via the confirm route, ensure the execution result is logged back to the memory if needed (the log file is updated, but perhaps adding to recent_tasks in context might be useful). However, since run_agent will already handle adding to recent_tasks on normal execution, for confirmed tasks we might rely on the log only. The key is to update the counters and any failure pattern if rejected.
Files to update: app.py (inside /confirm route – adjust finalize call and log handling), context_manager.py (add track_confirmed, track_rejected functions), agent_runner.py (modify finalize_task_execution to use those functions and handle the passed task_info).


Correct Drive Log Listing: In app.py /logs_from_drive, import and call the correct function name from drive_uploader.py. We will either rename list_recent_drive_logs to list_recent_logs in the module or simply import it as list_recent_drive_logs and call that. The function should return the IDs or metadata of recent log files. After fixing, the front-end will be able to fetch the latest logs stored on Google Drive, aiding transparency. This is a straightforward one-line change (plus import) to eliminate the error.
Files to update: drive_uploader.py (possibly rename function or add an alias), app.py (use the correct function name in the route).

Extend Intent Handling (Minor): To prepare for upcoming features, we can stub out a couple of additional actions in task_executor.py (or executor.py if that’s the name in use). For instance, add a case for modify_file or append_file that we might use later, even if it just returns “not implemented” for now. This is not strictly a bugfix, but setting up these cases will make it easier to implement file modifications as tasks in the next steps. We will also ensure that execute_task (or execute_action) returns a standard structure with success boolean (currently, it returns status and message – we might want to standardize on a {"success": True/False, "message": "...", ...} format for consistency with the rest of the agent’s expectations).
Files to update: task_executor.py (add placeholders for new intents, ensure return format consistency).


By completing Step 1, the agent’s task queue will function correctly (you can queue up a series of file creates or other actions and use /run_next repeatedly to execute them). The confirmation workflow will properly increment trust metrics and not leave the agent in an inconsistent state. We’ll have cleared the annoying bugs, providing a stable platform for more advanced capabilities.

2. Introduce App Generation (Scaffolding) and Basic Deployment

With core fixes in place, we move to Phase 2 goals: enabling the agent to build and deploy a simple app from minimal input. This step empowers a user to say “Make a hello world API” and have the agent do (nearly) the rest. We will implement a new high-level intent and the supporting logic to generate code and deploy it.

New Intent: create_app (or similar): Extend the agent’s command handling to recognize instructions for creating a new application/project. This could be triggered by a structured command (intent: "create_app") possibly with parameters (app name, description, tech stack) or by parsing a natural language request. For now, we can implement it as a direct intent that expects a JSON payload describing the app (to be provided by the UI or ChatGPT). In agent_runner.py run_agent, detect if the intent is "create_app" and handle it specially. Rather than directly calling execute_task (since this is a complex, multi-part operation), we’ll perform a sequence of actions: code generation, file creation, then deployment. Each sub-action will be logged so the user can see the plan.

Code Generation Module: Create a new module, e.g. code_generator.py, with a function generate_app_code(spec). This will use an LLM (GPT-4) or predefined templates to produce the code for the app based on the spec. The spec might include the framework (e.g., Flask), endpoints or functionality, etc. Initially, to keep things simple and minimize user input, we can assume a default “hello world” if no detailed spec is given. Since this agent is controlled via ChatGPT, one approach is to let ChatGPT provide the code. However, to move toward autonomy, we can integrate an API call to OpenAI if credentials are available. The best practice is to have the agent confirm with the user before using an API that could incur token costs – but here the panel’s ChatGPT might already be doing it. In any case, implement generate_app_code to return a set of file contents: e.g., a dictionary like {"app.py": "<code>", "requirements.txt": "<code>"} for a Flask app.

If direct LLM integration is not desired yet, as a placeholder we can use a boilerplate template for a Flask “Hello World” app (for example, define a simple string of code that starts a Flask server with one route returning "Hello World"). This ensures the feature works end-to-end; later we can replace it with dynamic generation from GPT.
Files to create/update: code_generator.py (new, containing generate_app_code function), agent_runner.py (call this function when handling create_app).


Scaffolding the Project Files: Once code is generated, the agent needs to create the files in its filesystem. We will enhance task_executor.py to handle either bulk file creation or directory management. There are a couple of approaches:

Simple approach: Loop through each file path and content returned by generate_app_code, and call our existing file creation routine for each. This means for an app with multiple files, the agent will perform several create_file actions. We can automate this loop inside the create_app handling so it’s invisible to the user (i.e., the user’s single command triggers multiple internal file writes). Ensure to create a subdirectory for the project if desired (e.g., a folder named after the project or a generic "generated_app"). However, since the current deploy method zips the whole directory, we might simply generate files in the root or a known folder. It might be cleaner to generate inside a subfolder like ./my_app/ and then deploy that folder. We can have the code generator include the folder name in file paths, or create the folder and prefix file writes accordingly.

Directory handling: Implement a new intent or internal action create_directory in task_executor.py to make a folder (if we decide to use one for the project). For now, if using a subfolder, we’ll call os.makedirs(project_dir, exist_ok=True) in our code rather than treat it as a separate task, to keep things simple.

Write each file to disk. After each file creation, log a success message. We may compile a summary of all files created to show the user after completion.
Files to update: task_executor.py (possibly add a create_directory case), agent_runner.py (in create_app flow, iterate file creations).

Automated Deployment to Vercel: After generating the app files, the agent should deploy the new app. Leverage deployment_manager.deploy_to_vercel for this. We will need to adjust it to deploy the correct content: if we created the app in a subfolder, call zip_directory(project_folder, ...) instead of zipping ".". If the app is in the root, deploying “.” will deploy the agent plus app, which is not ideal. So, likely use a subfolder approach. Update deploy_to_vercel to accept an optional directory path to deploy. For example, deploy_to_vercel(token, project_name, directory="my_app"). It will zip that directory rather than the whole repo.

Ensure we have the Vercel API token available (via config or environment). If not, the agent should report an error or request the user to provide it (perhaps through a secure method).

When calling deploy_to_vercel, capture the response. On success, get the deployment URL (already returned by the function). The agent should present this URL to the user (e.g., “✅ App deployed to: https://your-app-url”). On failure, present the error message and perhaps keep the app files so the user can try again after resolving any issue.

Cost/Confirmation: Even though Vercel’s hobby tier is free, it’s good to inform the user that we are deploying. The agent should either automatically proceed (if we assume free by default) or ask “Ready to deploy to Vercel? (This uses the free tier.)” if we want an extra confirmation. To minimize friction, we might skip confirmation for deployment in this step but include a clear log message that it’s using the free tier (we’ll expand on cost awareness in Step 5). Given that Phase 2 emphasizes minimal user input, we lean towards auto-deploy for now (assuming trust is sufficient), while logging the action.
Files to update: deployment_manager.py (allow specifying source directory in zip_directory/deploy_to_vercel), agent_runner.py (after files are created, call deploy and handle the result).


User Feedback & Logging: Throughout the create_app process, the agent should keep the user informed in a concise way. Likely the final API response from /run for create_app will contain a summary like: “Created X files for project Y. Deploying to Vercel... Deployment successful: [URL]”. Each sub-step (file creation, deployment) will also be in the logs. Also, log a deployment_event in memory via log_deployment_event(success=True/False, source="create_app", note=URL_or_error). This updates the deployment_events list in context for history.

We should also increment the confirmed action count or trust for deployment if it succeeds (perhaps treat it as implicitly confirmed if it runs without user prompt). We might handle that when we implement trust, but keep it in mind.



After Step 2, the agent will be capable of scaffolding a basic Flask app and deploying it with essentially one user command. We will test this by issuing a create_app intent (or using the panel with a natural language instruction if integrated with ChatGPT prompting). The expected outcome: the agent creates an app.py with a Flask hello world, creates a requirements.txt with Flask listed, then deploys to Vercel and returns the live URL. This fulfills the Phase 2 milestone of going from instruction to a live application. All of this is done while respecting the “low-code” ethos – the user doesn’t have to manually write any code or deployment scripts.

3. Enable Autonomous Self-Editing with Trust and Git Integration

In this step, we focus on Phase 4 features: allowing the agent to modify its own code and commit changes autonomously, under a trust-based safety framework. The idea is to reduce the need for the user to approve every little change once the agent has demonstrated competency, but still keep the user in control for high-risk actions or if the agent is in unfamiliar territory.

Trust Score Calculation: Implement a simple trust metric in the agent’s memory and logic. We will use the existing intent_stats and confirm counts to derive this. For example, trust could be a score from 0 to 1 (or a percentage) representing success rate of recent tasks, or it could be categorical (High, Medium, Low) based on thresholds. Initially, we can do something straightforward: e.g., if confirmed_count > 5 and failure_rate < 20%, consider trust “high” for routine tasks. Or maintain a per-intent trust: e.g., track how many times create_file succeeded vs failed in intent_stats – if a particular intent has, say, 5 successes and 0 failures, the agent can trust itself more to do that without asking.

We will add a function in context_manager.py to compute the trust level, perhaps get_trust_score(intent=None). If an intent is provided, it can weigh the stats for that action; otherwise a general trust. This could combine overall success rates and number of confirmed actions.

The trust score or level can be stored in memory (for visibility) or computed on the fly. We might add a field in context like "autonomy_level": "high" | "low" or simply keep using the counts. For now, a simple rule-based threshold will suffice, and we can refine as we gather more data.

Auto-Confirmation Logic: Using the trust metric, adjust the agent’s execution flow so that it doesn’t always require manual confirmation. Specifically, in run_agent (agent_runner), before executing a plan we will decide whether to run immediately or to log and pause for confirmation.

For example: if the planned action is deemed safe and routine (like creating a file in the workspace) and the trust score for that action is high (the agent has done it many times successfully), then proceed to execute it immediately. If the action is risky or unfamiliar (like deploying code, deleting files, or anything the agent hasn’t done often), and trust is low, then instead of executing, the agent should return an execution plan with confirmationNeeded=True (and not execute until the user confirms).

Implementation: Introduce a check in run_agent such as:

if "intent" in input_data and requires_confirmation(input_data["intent"], memory):
    # Log plan, mark confirmation needed, and return without executing
else:
    # safe to execute directly
    result = execute_task(plan)
    ...

The requires_confirmation function (we can implement in agent_runner.py or context_manager) will use the trust logic from above. For example, always require confirmation for deploy_app or destructive actions unless trust is very high; require confirmation for self code edits until a certain number of successes; don’t require for simple file writes if we’ve done them successfully multiple times.

We’ll also provide a way for the user to override this behavior (maybe a setting in context or via UI toggle to force confirm everything or allow auto-all). That could be a simple flag in context like "always_confirm": False by default. For now, we assume default behavior as described.

Update the logging: when the agent decides to auto-execute or to require confirmation, make sure the log reflects that decision (e.g., include a field confirmationNeeded in the log JSON). We already set confirmationNeeded=False on confirm, but we should set it True when we defer execution.


Autonomous Self-Editing: The agent already has a modify_self(filename, updated_code) function to edit its own files and save a backup. We want the agent to be able to improve its own code when needed. With the trust mechanism, we can allow the agent to perform certain self-edits without asking every time. For example, if the agent identifies an inefficiency in its code or a missing feature (possibly via its “self_notes” or failure patterns), it could draft a code change and apply it. In practice, this might be triggered by the user’s instruction (like “optimize yourself” or in a multi-step plan). For now, we’ll integrate it as follows:

Add a new intent, e.g., "modify_code" or "self_edit", which includes parameters: filename and a description of the change or new code content. If trust is high and the change seems minor, the agent can auto-apply it. If not, it can plan it out and ask for confirmation.

The actual editing can reuse modify_self to perform the file change and log the backup. We will surface the result to the user (just like any task result).

This effectively allows autonomous code rewriting. We must use this carefully – perhaps mainly as part of the agent’s own development tasks (like if it’s refactoring itself according to this roadmap!). In any case, the plumbing for self-edit intents will be in place.
Files to update: agent_runner.py (intent handling for modify_code: call modify_self and return the result), task_executor.py (could also have a case for a generic file edit, but using modify_self is fine to start).


Git Commit & Push Changes: Strengthen the version control integration so that the agent commits its changes autonomously. After any successful self-edit or creation of project files, the agent should commit the changes to the repository (if available). We will implement a simple Git wrapper, possibly in a new git_manager.py module:

commit_changes(commit_message): stages all changes and commits with the provided message. We can call git via subprocess or use a library like GitPython. To keep it simple, using subprocess calls (os.system("git add -A && git commit -m 'message' && git push")) might suffice, assuming Git is set up. We have to ensure this runs in the environment (with proper credentials or token). If not configured, handle errors gracefully (maybe log that commit failed due to missing credentials, and skip).

We will craft commit messages that describe the change. For example, for a create_app action, commit message “Scaffolded new app: <ProjectName>”; for a self-edit, message “Self-edit: fixed queue bug in app.py”. These can be derived from the task or provided in the intent.

Integrate this commit step at the end of run_agent for relevant actions: perhaps after every task that modifies files (including the agent’s own code or when it generates a project). We might want to filter – e.g., commit only core files or project files, not commit the context.json or logs. We have a list AGENT_CORE_FILES in agent_runner; we could decide to commit those and any new project directories.

Also, consider pushing to GitHub only when trust is high or after user confirmation on first push (to avoid spamming a repo with bad commits). Possibly we first commit locally and push when a milestone is reached. But since the user specifically wants autonomous committing when trust is high, we’ll aim to push automatically after each successful step once the agent has some track record.
Files to update/create: git_manager.py (new, with commit function), agent_runner.py (call commit after tasks or at end of run_agent; also ensure to ignore committing certain files like logs, maybe via .gitignore which the repo likely has). Possibly update environment to include repo URL or token if needed (outside scope of code).

Rollback Mechanism: Implement a basic rollback capability. Given that we have backups of files (the .bak.timestamp files from modify_self) and Git history once commits are in place, the agent should be able to undo a change if needed. Two scenarios:

Single-step rollback: if the last action fails miserably (e.g., a self-edit causes an error), the agent can immediately revert that change. This can be done by restoring the backup file. We will add a function rollback_last_self_edit() that finds the latest backup in memory["self_edits"] (context) and restores it (copy the .bak over the current file). It can then commit a reversion if appropriate. This function can be triggered if a self-edit task result was a failure (the agent could decide to rollback automatically or ask the user if it should rollback).

General rollback: if the user requests or if a multi-step sequence goes astray, the agent could revert to the last stable Git commit. This would involve calling git revert or resetting to HEAD~1. We might not implement the full interactive revert now, but by committing each change, we at least allow a human to revert via Git if needed. We will note in the plan that after each phase of work, a stable commit is present (e.g., tag commits that correspond to successful deploys).

We will integrate a /rollback endpoint or an intent to trigger rollback if the user requests it. This gives a measure of safety for the user to undo the agent’s autonomous changes. Even if we don’t fully automate when the agent decides to rollback by itself (that could be complex to decide), having the command available is important.
Files to update: agent_runner.py (add a rollback_last_self_edit function and possibly a route/intent to call it), context_manager.py (no major changes, just ensure backups are logged which it already does).



By the end of Step 3, the agent will be more autonomous in managing itself. It will intelligently skip confirmation for safe tasks, making the user experience smoother (no need to hit “approve” for every file creation once the agent is trusted). It will also commit changes to version control for traceability and be able to self-update its code. All of this is done with safety nets: a trust system that gates risky operations, backups for critical files, and the ability to rollback. The user can gradually increase the agent’s autonomy knowing that if something goes wrong, there is a clear history of changes and a path to undo.

4. Implement Multi-Step Task Planning (Autonomous Task Decomposition)

Now we tackle Phase 5 capabilities: the agent’s ability to break down complex instructions into multiple steps and execute them sequentially. This will greatly reduce the need for the user to micromanage each step of a project.

Planning Module: Create a new component to handle task planning. For instance, a module planner.py with a function plan_tasks(goal_description). This function will take a high-level goal (which could be a natural language instruction or a JSON with a complex request) and output a list of discrete tasks that, when executed in order, achieve the goal.

To generate the plan, we will likely use GPT-4 (or the ChatGPT the user has in the loop) because breaking down arbitrary projects is a complex AI task. The planner function can prompt an LLM with something like: “Decompose the following goal into a step-by-step plan of actions for a task agent. Provide each step as a JSON with an intent and necessary details.” Then parse the LLM’s response.

Alternatively, for certain known patterns, we could hard-code plans. For example, if the user says “Create a full-stack app with X feature”, we know generally the steps: (1) create backend, (2) create frontend, (3) integrate, (4) deploy. But an LLM-based approach will be more flexible.

Initially, implement plan_tasks in a way that it returns a list like:

[ 
  {"intent": "create_app", "app_name": "X", "description": "Y"}, 
  {"intent": "create_ui", "framework": "React", ...}, 
  {"intent": "deploy_app"} 
]

For a given high-level instruction. We will test with a simpler scenario as well: if a user says “Add a new feature to the project”, the agent might plan: modify a file, run tests, deploy.
Files to create/update: planner.py (new, with plan_tasks function using OpenAI API or stubbed logic), possibly requirements to allow openAI API usage if needed (ensuring the environment has an API ke

Triggering the Planner: Modify the agent’s input handling to use the planner when appropriate. In agent_runner.run_agent, if the input is identified as a high-level goal (for example, if input_data.get("intent") == "plan" or if the user input is a plain language request without a direct known intent), then the agent should invoke the planner instead of treating it as a single task.

We can set a convention: if the incoming JSON has a field "goal" or if intent == "plan_tasks", we use the planner. Alternatively, the UI might always send a top-level instruction as intent: "plan_tasks", "goal": "<user text>" for natural language. We’ll coordinate with how the panel sends data.

Once plan_tasks returns a list of steps, the agent will store these in its next_steps queue (via the context manager). We can either directly start executing them one by one, or simply return the plan to the user for confirmation. A safer approach: present the plan first (especially if it’s multi-step) to let the user approve it, then execute. But since our aim is to minimize user input, we could auto-run if trust is high. Maybe default to showing the plan summary and requiring one confirmation to proceed with all steps.

Implementation: After obtaining the plan list, save it to memory (context["next_steps"] = [...]) and also include it in the response as plannedSteps for transparency. Possibly set a flag planGenerated=True. Then, either automatically start execution or wait for a trigger (the UI could call /run_next in a loop, or we implement an automated loop).

For autonomy, we can have the agent immediately call its own /run_next internally in a loop until the queue is done. However, implementing an internal loop in Flask request might not be ideal (it could tie up the request). Instead, a simpler solution: the response could indicate that a plan has been queued, and the front-end could then call a new endpoint like /run_plan to let the agent iterate through next_steps. Alternatively, implement an endpoint /run_all that keeps executing run_next repeatedly until queue empty. For now, we can implement a utility in agent_runner like execute_plan(plan_list) that loops tasks and executes them sequentially in one go (for when the agent calls it internally). We have to be careful with logging and state between steps.

Make sure to handle failures: If a step fails, the agent (depending on trust settings) might attempt a corrective action. For example, if a test fails, the plan executor could insert a new step to fix the bug. This is complex, so initially, we will just stop execution and return the failure to the user if a step fails, with the remaining steps still in queue so the user can decide to continue or adjust. More advanced dynamic planning can come later.
Files to update: agent_runner.py (detect when to plan, call planner, queue steps; possibly add an execute_plan function to loop through queued tasks), context_manager.py (the next_steps is already there; we might use clear_next_steps at the end of execution or when starting a new plan).


Sequential Execution Loop: Implement a mechanism for the agent to run through the planned tasks sequentially with minimal user involvement. We have two main approaches:

1. One-shot loop: As mentioned, have the agent loop internally. For each step in the plan, call execute_task (or even use run_agent recursively) and collect results. After each, update memory and logs. If all steps succeed, return a summary of success. If a step fails, break and return the partial results along with the error, possibly suggesting the user intervene or allow the agent to re-plan.


2. Stepwise via API calls: Alternatively, simply rely on the existing /run_next mechanism and possibly a new /run_all. For instance, after queuing the steps, the agent could respond with a message like “Plan ready with N steps. Use /run_next to execute step 1.” The user (or the UI automatically) would then call /run_next repeatedly. This is less ideal for a non-coder user, but easier to implement. Given our goal of automation, we prefer the agent to proceed automatically if allowed.



We will likely implement the one-shot loop inside run_agent when it detects executionPlanned is a list or such scenario. This way, from the user perspective, the agent just does it. We must be careful not to exceed any request time limits or cause long blocking operations. If needed, we could execute steps asynchronously or by chaining calls, but that’s an advanced optimization. Assuming the tasks are not extremely long, a loop of a few steps should be fine.

Example: The user says “Build a hello world web app with a homepage.” The planner returns: 1) create backend API, 2) create frontend HTML, 3) deploy to Vercel. The agent would then, in one go, execute step1 (maybe calling our create_app for backend), then step2 (perhaps a new intent to create a basic HTML file, similar to Phase 3’s goal), and then step3 (call deployment again). It would gather the results (maybe URLs for both backend and frontend if applicable) and return a final summary. The user would see the app live with one instruction.

Logging and Memory: Each step execution should still produce a log entry and update recent_tasks. The agent’s memory next_steps should be cleared when done. Also, we should consider adding a notion of an “overall goal” to memory (maybe store the original goal in context while executing the plan). The get_current_goal in context_manager could show something like “Next: intent” for queued tasks; we can enhance it to show “Executing plan: Step i of N – [current step description]” for transparency if needed.
Files to update: agent_runner.py (implement the loop in run_agent or a helper function).


Persisting and Resuming Plans: Ensure that if the agent stops mid-plan (e.g., server restarts or crashes), it can continue later. Because we are storing the plan in context.json (as next_steps), the state is preserved. We might want to mark which step was last done. One simple way: as we pop each step, we save memory. If interrupted, whatever remains in next_steps are the not-yet-executed steps. The user could call /run_next after reboot to continue. To make this smoother, we could keep an index or status, but it may be enough as is. We will document that behavior. If we want a more explicit resume, we might include the plan itself in memory or a pointer to current step, but that might be overkill right now.


With Step 4 implemented, the agent becomes much more powerful: it can take a broad request and handle multiple actions to fulfill it. We will test this by giving a multi-part instruction and observing the agent outline a plan and carry it out. This achieves the core of Phase 5: sequential execution of a generated plan with minimal user intervention. The user essentially can delegate an entire project to the agent in one go (within reason), and the agent will know how to proceed step by step.

5. Smart Deployment Decisions and Cost Transparency

As the agent starts deploying apps by itself, we want to ensure it chooses the right deployment target and informs the user about any cost implications. This step incorporates parts of Phase 2 (efficient hosting choices) and Phase 6 (cost awareness).

Deployment Provider Logic: Expand the deployment process to not be tied to a single provider. Currently, we have Vercel integration. Another common free-tier provider is Render (which was the original hosting for the agent). We should implement a deployment function for Render or any alternative, and include logic to choose between them.

Implement deploy_to_render(api_key, project_name) in deployment_manager.py (if Render has an API or we might use git push render approach). Render’s free tier allows deploying via GitHub or via a CLI; since we may not have an easy API like Vercel’s, this could be a stub or use their Docker deploy method. This might be complex, so as a placeholder, we could simulate Render deploy (just log that “Deployed to Render (simulated)” if needed). If we have time/resources, use their REST API: e.g., Render has an API to create services and deploy from a repo. That would require repository integration or container registry, which may be too involved for now.

For our immediate needs, we might simply keep Vercel as the primary deployment method, but structure our code to allow adding others. For example, have a function deploy_app(provider, credentials, project_path) that calls the appropriate deploy function based on provider argument.

The decision logic can be straightforward: default to Vercel unless the user explicitly requests Render or if some criteria is met (for instance, if the project is a type Vercel can’t easily handle, we’d use Render – but since Vercel can handle most small apps and even static frontends, it’s a good default). We will note in documentation that Vercel is used by default due to its generous free tier and simplicity.


Cost and Resource Awareness: Every time the agent is about to perform an action that might incur cost (deploying to cloud, using an API that charges money, etc.), it should notify the user. We will implement small checks and messages:

In the deployment step (especially for Vercel), although it’s free, we add a note: “(Using free tier – no cost expected.)” in the status message. If we integrate another provider or if the app is likely to exceed free usage (hard to predict, but for example if user asked to deploy a heavy app or many instances), we warn accordingly.

If OpenAI API is used for code generation or planning, we should account for that – using the API will consume tokens from the user’s quota. The agent could output a log like “Used GPT-4 to generate code (this uses your OpenAI API credits).” However, since our agent might rely on ChatGPT through the UI, the user is already in that loop and aware of usage. Still, if we shift to autonomous API calls, we’ll add a note for transparency.

We will also add to the deployment_events log in context whether the deploy was free or if any cost-related info is available (e.g., deployment size). We might not have an API to get cost info directly, but we can annotate ourselves. For instance, add a field {"provider": "Vercel", "freeTier": True} in the deployment event.

If in the future the agent uses a paid service or exceeds free tier, it should halt and ask for confirmation. We can implement a simple safeguard: keep track of how many deployments have been done or how often. If it’s beyond a threshold (say Vercel free tier might limit builds per hour), warn the user. This might be beyond our scope to fully enforce, but awareness is key.


User Alerts: Modify responses to include cost alerts where appropriate. For example, after deploying, along with the success message, append something like “(Deployed on free tier – monitor usage to avoid charges).”. If we ever decide to deploy to a platform that requires a credit card on file, definitely require explicit confirmation. The agent by default should avoid those scenarios unless user explicitly chooses.

Another angle: for long-running tasks or heavy computations, the agent could mention resource usage. But our context is mostly code tasks, so main costs are cloud services and API calls.



By implementing Step 5, we make sure the agent is prudent and transparent about using external resources. The user will be informed of the deployment target and any potential costs in plain language, preventing surprises. The agent will also prefer free options (like Vercel’s free tier) to keep things frictionless. In essence, the agent acts like an assistant who is mindful of the “budget” and always tries the free route first, only escalating to paid solutions with user approval.

6. Integrate Safety Best Practices and Sandboxing

As the agent becomes more autonomous and executes arbitrary code (including code it writes itself), it’s critical to integrate best practices from the AI safety and software engineering communities to ensure reliability and security. This final step involves adding a sandbox for code execution, enhancing test coverage, and double-checking risky operations.

Secure Sandbox for Running Code: Introduce a mechanism for the agent to run untrusted code (like newly generated code or test cases) in an isolated environment. This is to prevent a bug or malicious code from crashing or harming the agent’s main process. Possible approaches include:

Using Python’s exec in a restricted context or the RestrictedPython library to evaluate code with certain built-in functions disabled.

Spawning a separate subprocess or container (if available) to run the code. For example, for running the newly created app for verification, we could launch it on a random port in a subprocess and then hit it with a request to see if it responds (this was mentioned as a post-deploy verification idea). Or run unit tests in a subprocess.

Since we are on Replit/Vercel, we might not easily spin up containers, but we can create a lightweight sandbox function in executor.py that runs code strings with a whitelisted set of operations.

We will add a new intent, e.g., execute_code or run_tests, which uses this sandbox. For instance, after generating an app, the agent could have a step “run_tests” where it executes some basic verification script within the sandbox. This can catch errors early.

While implementing a full sandbox is complex, we can incorporate existing best practices like timeouts (to prevent infinite loops) and banning dangerous built-ins (os.system, file operations outside a certain directory, etc.) in that execution. We’ll rely on community guidance for safe eval of Python (for example, one approach is to use ast to parse the code and ensure no forbidden nodes before executing).
Files to update: task_executor.py (add an execute_code action that uses a restricted eval or subprocess), possibly a new sandbox_runner.py if we want to separate that logic.


Automated Testing of Agent-Generated Code: Whenever the agent generates code (like in create_app), incorporate a quick self-test. For a Flask app, for example, the agent can attempt to import the app or run a test HTTP request to the endpoint. This can be done either locally (if we can run it) or by sending a request to the deployed URL after deployment (which we considered and partially covered in deployment verification). Adding a local test prior to deploy might catch syntax errors or obvious issues so we don’t deploy broken code.

We can use the existing run_tests_from_file structure (there’s a test_suite.json concept in agent_runner). Perhaps extend it or generate a temporary test on the fly. For example, after creating the app, create a small Python snippet that tries to start the Flask app or at least import and call the Flask route function. Run that in sandbox. If it fails, log the error and either attempt a fix (maybe ask ChatGPT for help) or at least inform the user and abort deployment. This ties into the dynamic plan adjustment of Phase 5 (the agent noticing something failed and adding a fix task). While full AI-driven debugging might be complex, even a simple “test failed, please check” is better than silently deploying a non-working app.

If tests pass, proceed to deploy. If not, perhaps mark the plan as failed and require user input.


Strict Limitations on Self-Modification: As a best practice, even though the agent can edit its own code, we should ensure it doesn’t corrupt its core logic. One approach is to restrict self-editing to a whitelist of files or to require a higher trust threshold for editing critical files (like the agent_runner itself). For example, the agent might more freely edit project files or add new modules, but be cautious about altering agent_runner.py or context_manager.py unless absolutely sure. We might implement a check in modify_self that if the file is one of the core ones, perhaps always require confirmation or create multiple backups. This reduces the risk of the agent “breaking itself” beyond repair.

Also, continuing the idea of commit history, if the agent does break itself, the user or agent can revert using Git, which is why those commits are valuable. We will encourage usage of git revert as needed (maybe even automate it if the agent detects it cannot start due to a bad self-change – e.g., on next startup, it could detect if it crashed last time and revert the last commit). This might be a stretch goal, but worth noting.


Transparency and Control: Throughout all these improvements, maintain transparency so the user knows what’s happening. Ensure that every autonomous action is logged either in the memory or the logs with clear descriptions. The UI can present these logs or a summary (like a “recent actions” feed using memory/summary). For example, if the agent decided to auto-run a plan of 5 steps, the user should see that plan and the outcome of each step without having to dig. We might enhance the memory_summary endpoint to include something like the last plan executed or last deployment URL.

Additionally, keep a channel for user control: e.g., a user could set context["always_confirm"] = True if they want to dial back autonomy, or clear the next_steps queue via an endpoint if they want to cancel a running plan. We can implement an endpoint /cancel_plan that simply clears the queue and maybe stops any ongoing loop (if we implement looping in code). This kind of control ensures that if the agent goes astray or the user changes their mind, they can halt the process.


Performance and Efficiency Considerations: As we add features, we should also consider the performance. The agent might be doing heavy operations (like zipping and deploying, or calling APIs). Use asynchronous calls or background tasks if needed on the hosting platform. For example, the deployment might be turned into an async job to avoid blocking the main thread. Flask could offload that if needed, or we manage with quick responses followed by logs. This is more of an optimization – at small scale it’s fine, but keep it in mind as best practice so the UI remains responsive.


By integrating these best practices in Step 6, the agent becomes safer and more robust. We reduce the chances of runaway code execution harming the system, we give the user confidence that the agent’s autonomy won’t lead to uncontrolled actions, and we provide mechanisms to test and validate the agent’s work. Essentially, we are wrapping the agent’s new powers in a safety harness: sandboxing to contain execution, confirmation logic tied to trust, and easy rollback/override options.


---

File & Module Updates Summary

For quick reference, here is a summary of planned updates by file/module, consolidating the steps above:

app.py (Flask App):

Fix the /run_next route to properly retrieve and execute queued tasks (extract the step and use run_agent on it).

Fix the /confirm route to call finalize_task_execution with correct parameters and handle rejection vs confirmation updates.

Correct the log listing route to use the proper list_recent_drive_logs function.

(If needed) Add new routes like /run_all or /cancel_plan to support executing plans and canceling, for convenience.

Ensure CORS and endpoint definitions allow the front-end to use new functionalities (no major changes, just confirming it).


context_manager.py:

Add get_next_step(context) to pop the next task from next_steps safely (and save the memory afterward). Also possibly add a requires_confirmation(intent, context) helper to determine if a given intent needs user approval based on trust.

Implement track_confirmed(context) and track_rejected(context) to increment counts and save to context. These will be used when tasks are confirmed or rejected.

Possibly implement a simple trust calculation function (or at least store enough info like success rates per intent in intent_stats which is already there). May add a field for overall trust or autonomy level if desired.

The rest of context structure remains, but we’ll ensure last_updated is set whenever memory changes (maybe in save_memory) and that recent_tasks and failure_patterns are pruned properly (already partially handled).


agent_runner.py:

run_agent: Main logic gets several enhancements:

Handle queue_task intent (already present) – no major change needed there aside from ensuring it uses context_manager functions properly.

Add handling for create_app intent: call code generator, loop file creation, call deploy, etc.

Integrate trust check before executing plans: decide to auto-execute or require confirm. If confirm needed, perhaps log the plan and return without running.

If a plan (list of tasks) is provided (e.g. from the planner or memory), handle executing multiple steps sequentially (maybe via an execute_plan helper or a loop here).

After task execution, if auto-confirmed, treat it as confirmed for logging (increment confirmed_count internally).

After each task or plan, consider calling git_manager.commit_changes to commit if there were file modifications.


run_next (if kept here): possibly remove or delegate to context_manager.get_next_step + run_agent. Since we fixed it in app.py, we may not need a separate function here.

finalize_task_execution: update to accept a status and optional task info, and call track_confirmed/track_rejected accordingly. Ensure it saves context so the counts persist.

modify_self: verify it’s working as intended (it backs up and writes the file). Might integrate a call to git_manager.commit_changes after modify_self to automatically version-control the self-edit (with an appropriate message).

Add a function execute_plan(plan_list) or integrate plan execution in run_agent as described, to loop through steps and handle success/failure.

Add rollback_last_self_edit function to restore from backup if needed.

Possibly define requires_confirmation(intent, memory) here if not in context_manager.

Ensure AGENT_CORE_FILES or similar lists are up to date if needed (for commit ignore or other uses).


task_executor.py (executor.py):

Expand the execute_action match-case to include new intents:

create_directory (if used) to create folders.

modify_file or a general write_file vs append_file if needed.

execute_code to run a code string in sandbox (this might call out to a sandbox function).

In each case, implement necessary safety checks (e.g., for file paths, ensure no traversal outside allowed directory).

Return a dict with "success": True/False and a helpful message for each action.


Possibly rename or ensure consistency between execute_task and execute_action if both exist. (Our code references execute_task being imported; maybe unify on one name).

This module might call into others like sandbox or code generator as needed (or those can be done in agent_runner directly; we decide where the logic lives: straightforward way is to keep task_executor limited to simple filesystem operations and do complex logic in agent_runner).

confirm_handler.py:

This standalone module might be redundant with the logic in app.py now. We can either update it similarly (read log, execute planned, etc.) or remove it if we fully handle confirmation in the main app. It was a utility to confirm via reading logs; since we integrated confirm directly in the endpoint, we may not need a separate function. If we keep it, ensure it calls the updated execute_task and updates memory accordingly (similar fixes as in app.py’s confirm route).

To avoid confusion, possibly deprecate confirm_handler and use the /confirm endpoint as the single source of truth for confirming tasks.


drive_uploader.py:

Minor change: ensure the listing function name and usage match (list_recent_logs). We might add a small helper list_recent_logs = list_recent_drive_logs for convenience.

Otherwise, Google Drive integration stays as is (we assume service account JSON is configured). Maybe add error handling for when Drive creds are missing (so the agent doesn’t crash if it can’t upload – just log an error).


deployment_manager.py:

Enhance deploy_to_vercel to accept a target directory path. The zip_directory function can be modified to take source_dir as a parameter (it already does) and we’ll call it with either “.” or a subfolder. We’ll also double-check that it excludes the agent’s own files if deploying an app subdir (the exclusion filters cover .git, logs, etc., which is good).

Implement a placeholder deploy_to_render function. This could, for now, return a not-implemented message or simulate success if we can’t fully integrate Render’s API. We document that Render support is planned and default remains Vercel.

Possibly add a generic deploy_app(provider, ... ) that chooses between vercel/render as discussed.

Ensure any deployment errors are propagated up so the agent can handle them (currently it returns a dict with error text, which we will use to alert the user).


code_generator.py (new):

Implement generate_app_code(spec) as described. Initially, maybe use a simple template for Flask apps. If possible, integrate an OpenAI API call here to make it truly based on spec. We should also include a function for front-end code generation if Phase 3 tasks come soon (like generate_frontend_code(spec) stubbed out).

Make sure to handle cases where the LLM generation fails or returns something unusable – add retries or default templates as fallback.

Also, consider security of generated code: for example, if an LLM suggests installing some unknown library, maybe we restrict to known safe libraries in Phase 2 (Flask, etc.). This ties in with sandboxing and user trust: initially keep the scope narrow.


planner.py (new):

Implement plan_tasks(goal) using GPT-4. It should return a list of task dicts. We will have to prompt it carefully (provide context about what intents are available). This might require a prompt template (which we can hardcode) explaining the agent’s capabilities.

Also implement a simpler fallback: if no LLM available or it fails, maybe parse the goal for keywords. (E.g., if “deploy” in text, add a deploy step, if “frontend” in text, add create_ui step, etc. – a very naive approach just so the agent does something).

This module will be critical for letting the agent handle arbitrary requests, so test it with a few scenarios to refine prompts.


git_manager.py (new):

Add commit_changes(message) function to perform Git commit & push. Also possibly a revert_last_commit() if we want to allow rollback via Git.

Use subprocess calls to Git. Ensure to handle cases where git is not initialized or remote not set (in our environment, the project likely is a git repo since GitHub integration is mentioned).

We might want to exclude certain files from commit: for example, we don’t need to commit logs or the context.json to GitHub. If a .gitignore is in place, it will handle that. If not, consider adding one via the agent if needed.

After each successful commit, log it in memory (maybe add to self_notes or a new commit_history in context). But since commits are in the Git log, it's less crucial to duplicate in memory; a simple confirmation message in output is fine.


tests (if any):

Update or create a basic test_suite.json for critical functions if possible. We saw reference to running tests; we can include tests for new features (like ensure queue works, ensure plan outputs expected steps for a given input, etc.). This will allow quick regression testing by calling /run_tests. This is optional but good to have as the project grows.



Each of these file changes will be bundled logically per the steps above, so that we can implement and verify one group at a time. By following this plan, we ensure that at the end of the process, the agent is significantly more autonomous and capable, yet remains safe, traceable, and user-friendly. We will have transformed it from a basic task executor into a self-building system that can scaffold entire projects and improve itself with minimal guidance, all while keeping the user informed and in control where it matters.

